5102
raM
2
]GL.sc[
3v76130.2051:viXra
Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by
Reducing Internal Covariate Shift
Sergey Ioffe ChristianSzegedy
GoogleInc.,sioffe@google.com GoogleInc.,szegedy@google.com
Abstract
Usingmini-batchesofexamples,asopposedtooneexam-
pleatatime,ishelpfulinseveralways. First,thegradient
TrainingDeepNeuralNetworksiscomplicatedbythefact ofthelossoveramini-batchisanestimateofthegradient
thatthedistributionofeachlayer’sinputschangesduring overthetrainingset,whosequalityimprovesasthebatch
training,astheparametersofthepreviouslayerschange. size increases. Second, computationovera batchcan be
Thisslowsdownthetrainingbyrequiringlowerlearning much more efficientthan m computationsfor individual
ratesandcarefulparameterinitialization,andmakesitno- examples,dueto the parallelismaffordedby themodern
toriouslyhardtotrainmodelswithsaturatingnonlineari- computingplatforms.
ties. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate While stochastic gradient is simple and effective, it
shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer in- requires careful tuning of the model hyper-parameters,
puts.Ourmethoddrawsitsstrengthfrommakingnormal- specificallythelearningrateusedinoptimization,aswell
izationapartofthemodelarchitectureandperformingthe astheinitialvaluesforthemodelparameters. Thetrain-
normalization for each training mini-batch. Batch Nor- ingiscomplicatedbythefactthattheinputstoeachlayer
malizationallowsustousemuchhigherlearningratesand areaffectedbytheparametersofallprecedinglayers–so
belesscarefulaboutinitialization. Italsoactsasa regu- thatsmall changesto the networkparametersamplifyas
larizer, in some cases eliminating the need for Dropout. thenetworkbecomesdeeper.
Applied to a state-of-the-art image classification model, The change in the distributions of layers’ inputs
BatchNormalizationachievesthesameaccuracywith14 presents a problem because the layers need to continu-
times fewer training steps, and beats the original model ouslyadaptto the new distribution. When the inputdis-
by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch- tributiontoalearningsystemchanges,itissaidtoexperi-
normalizednetworks,weimproveuponthebestpublished encecovariateshift(Shimodaira,2000). Thisistypically
result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.9% top-5 handled via domain adaptation (Jiang, 2008). However,
validation error (and 4.8% test error), exceeding the ac- the notion of covariate shift can be extended beyondthe
curacyofhumanraters. learningsystemasawhole,toapplytoitsparts,suchasa
sub-networkoralayer. Consideranetworkcomputing
1 Introduction
ℓ=F (F (u,Θ ),Θ )
2 1 1 2
Deeplearninghasdramaticallyadvancedthe state ofthe where F and F are arbitrary transformations, and the
1 2
art in vision, speech, and many other areas. Stochas- parameters Θ ,Θ are to be learned so as to minimize
1 2
tic gradient descent (SGD) has proved to be an effec- the loss ℓ. Learning Θ can be viewed as if the inputs
2
tive way of training deep networks, and SGD variants x=F (u,Θ )arefedintothesub-network
1 1
such as momentum(Sutskeveretal., 2013) and Adagrad
(Duchietal.,2011)havebeenusedtoachievestateofthe ℓ=F 2 (x,Θ 2 ).
artperformance. SGDoptimizestheparametersΘofthe
Forexample,agradientdescentstep
network,soastominimizetheloss
1 N α m ∂F 2 (x i ,Θ 2 )
Θ=argm Θ in N Xi=1 ℓ(x i ,Θ) Θ 2 ← Θ 2 − m Xi=1 ∂Θ 2
wherex 1...N isthetrainingdataset. WithSGD,thetrain- (forbatchsizemandlearningrateα)isexactlyequivalent
ingproceedsinsteps,andateachstepweconsideramini- tothatforastand-alonenetworkF withinputx. There-
2
batchx 1...m ofsizem. Themini-batchisusedtoapprox- fore, the input distribution properties that make training
imatethegradientofthelossfunctionwithrespecttothe moreefficient–suchashavingthesamedistributionbe-
parameters,bycomputing tween the training and test data – apply to training the
sub-networkas well. As such it is advantageousfor the
1 ∂ℓ(x ,Θ)
i
. distributionofxtoremainfixedovertime.Then,Θ does
m ∂Θ 2
1

2 Towards Reducing Internal
not have to readjustto compensatefor the change in the
distributionofx. Covariate Shift
Fixed distribution of inputs to a sub-network would
We define Internal Covariate Shift as the change in the
havepositiveconsequencesforthelayersoutsidethesub-
distribution of network activations due to the change in
network,aswell. Consideralayerwithasigmoidactiva-
networkparametersduringtraining.Toimprovethetrain-
tionfunctionz = g(Wu+b)whereuisthelayerinput,
ing, we seek to reduce the internal covariate shift. By
the weight matrix W and bias vector b are the layer pa-
fixingthedistributionofthelayerinputsxasthetraining
rameters to be learned, and g(x) = 1 . As x
1+exp(−x) | | progresses,weexpecttoimprovethetrainingspeed.Ithas
increases,g′(x)tendstozero. Thismeansthatforalldi-
been long known (LeCunetal., 1998b; Wiesler&Ney,
mensionsofx=Wu+bexceptthosewithsmallabsolute
2011)thatthe networktrainingconvergesfaster ifits in-
values,thegradientflowingdowntouwillvanishandthe
putsarewhitened–i.e.,linearlytransformedtohavezero
modelwill train slowly. However, since x is affectedby meansandunitvariances,anddecorrelated.Aseachlayer
W,band theparametersofallthe layersbelow,changes observestheinputsproducedbythelayersbelow,itwould
tothoseparametersduringtrainingwilllikelymovemany
beadvantageoustoachievethesamewhiteningofthein-
dimensions of x into the saturated regime of the nonlin- putsofeachlayer. Bywhiteningtheinputstoeachlayer,
earity and slow down the convergence. This effect is
we would take a step towards achieving the fixed distri-
amplified as the network depth increases. In practice,
butionsof inputsthatwouldremovethe ill effectsof the
thesaturationproblemandtheresultingvanishinggradi-
internalcovariateshift.
entsareusuallyaddressedbyusingRectifiedLinearUnits
Wecouldconsiderwhiteningactivationsateverytrain-
(Nair&Hinton, 2010) ReLU(x) = max(x,0), careful
ing step or at some interval, either by modifying the
initialization (Bengio&Glorot, 2010; Saxeetal., 2013),
network directly or by changing the parameters of the
and small learning rates. If, however, we could ensure
optimization algorithm to depend on the network ac-
that the distribution of nonlinearity inputs remains more
tivation values (Wiesleretal., 2014; Raikoetal., 2012;
stableasthenetworktrains,thentheoptimizerwouldbe
Poveyetal., 2014; Desjardins&Kavukcuoglu). How-
less likely to get stuck in the saturated regime, and the
ever, if these modificationsare interspersed with the op-
trainingwouldaccelerate.
timization steps, then the gradient descent step may at-
tempt to update the parameters in a way that requires
We refer to the change in the distributions of internal the normalization to be updated, which reduces the ef-
nodesofadeepnetwork,inthecourseoftraining,asIn- fect of the gradient step. For example, consider a layer
ternalCovariateShift. Eliminatingitoffersapromiseof withtheinpututhataddsthelearnedbiasb,andnormal-
fastertraining. We proposeanewmechanism,whichwe izes the result by subtracting the mean of the activation
call Batch Normalization, that takes a step towards re- computed over the training data: x = x E[x] where
−
ducing internal covariate shift, and in doing so dramati- x = u+b, = x is the set of valuesof x over
1...N
cally accelerates the training of deep neural nets. It ac- the training s X et, an { d E[x] } = 1 bN x . If a gradient
N i=1 i
complishes this via a normalization step that fixes the descentstepignoresthedependenPceofE[x] onb,thenit
meansandvariancesoflayerinputs.BatchNormalization will update b b+∆b, where ∆b ∂ℓ/∂x. Then
also has a beneficial effect on the gradient flow through u+(b+∆b) ← E[u+(b+∆b)] = ∝ u+ − b E[u+b].
the network, by reducing the dependence of gradients Thus,thecomb − inationoftheupdatetoband − subbsequent
on the scale of the parameters or of their initial values. change in normalization led to no change in the output
This allows us to use much higher learning rates with- of the layer nor, consequently, the loss. As the training
out the risk of divergence. Furthermore, batch normal- continues,bwillgrowindefinitelywhilethelossremains
ization regularizes the model and reduces the need for fixed.Thisproblemcangetworseifthenormalizationnot
Dropout(Srivastavaetal.,2014). Finally,BatchNormal- onlycentersbutalsoscales theactivations. We haveob-
ization makes it possible to use saturating nonlinearities served this empirically in initial experiments, where the
bypreventingthenetworkfromgettingstuckinthesatu- model blows up when the normalization parameters are
ratedmodes. computedoutsidethegradientdescentstep.
Theissue with the aboveapproachisthatthe gradient
InSec.4.2,weapplyBatchNormalizationtothebest- descent optimization does not take into account the fact
performing ImageNet classification network, and show thatthe normalizationtakesplace. To addressthisissue,
that we can match its performanceusing only 7% of the we would like to ensure that, for any parameter values,
training steps, and can further exceed its accuracy by a thenetworkalwaysproducesactivationswiththedesired
substantialmargin. Usinganensembleofsuchnetworks distribution. Doing so would allow the gradient of the
trained with Batch Normalization, we achieve the top-5 loss with respect to the modelparametersto accountfor
error rate that improves upon the best known results on the normalization, and for its dependence on the model
ImageNetclassification. parametersΘ. Let again x be a layer input, treated as a
2

vector,and be thesetoftheseinputsoverthetraining weintroduce,foreachactivationx(k),apairofparameters
X
dataset. Thenormalizationcanthenbewrittenasatrans- γ(k),β(k),whichscaleandshiftthenormalizedvalue:
formation
x=Norm(x, )
y(k) =γ(k)x(k)+β(k).
X
which dependsnoto
b
nly on the giventrainingexamplex These parameters are learnbed along with the original
but on all examples – each of which dependson Θ if model parameters, and restore the representation power
X
xisgeneratedbyanotherlayer. Forbackpropagation,we ofthenetwork.Indeed,bysettingγ(k) = Var[x(k)]and
wouldneedtocomputetheJacobians β(k) =E[x(k)],wecouldrecovertheorigpinalactivations,
ifthatweretheoptimalthingtodo.
∂Norm(x, ) ∂Norm(x, )
X and X ; Inthebatchsettingwhereeachtrainingstepisbasedon
∂x ∂ theentiretrainingset,wewouldusethewholesettonor-
X
ignoring the latter term would lead to the explosion de- malizeactivations. However,thisisimpracticalwhenus-
scribedabove.Withinthisframework,whiteningthelayer ingstochasticoptimization. Therefore,wemakethesec-
inputs is expensive, as it requires computing the covari- ondsimplification: sinceweusemini-batchesinstochas-
ance matrix Cov[x] = E x∈X[xxT] E[x]E[x]T and its ticgradienttraining, eachmini-batchproducesestimates
inverse square root, to produce the w − hitened activations ofthemeanandvarianceofeachactivation.Thisway,the
Cov[x]−1/2(x E[x]), aswellasthederivativesofthese statistics used for normalization can fully participate in
transformsfor − backpropagation.Thismotivatesustoseek thegradientbackpropagation. Notethattheuse ofmini-
analternativethatperformsinputnormalizationinaway batchesisenabledbycomputationofper-dimensionvari-
thatis differentiableand doesnotrequirethe analysisof ancesratherthanjointcovariances;inthejointcase,reg-
theentiretrainingsetaftereveryparameterupdate. ularizationwouldberequiredsincethemini-batchsizeis
Some of the previous approaches (e.g. likelyto besmallerthanthe numberofactivationsbeing
(Lyu&Simoncelli, 2008)) use statistics computed whitened,resultinginsingularcovariancematrices.
over a single training example, or, in the case of image Consideramini-batch ofsizem. Sincethenormal-
B
networks,overdifferentfeaturemapsatagivenlocation. izationis appliedtoeachactivationindependently,letus
However, this changes the representation ability of a
focusonaparticularactivationx(k)andomitkforclarity.
network by discarding the absolute scale of activations. Wehavemvaluesofthisactivationinthemini-batch,
Wewanttoapreservetheinformationinthenetwork,by
= x .
normalizingtheactivationsinatrainingexamplerelative B { 1...m }
tothestatisticsoftheentiretrainingdata.
Letthenormalizedvaluesbex ,andtheirlineartrans-
1...m
formationsbey . Werefertothetransform
1...m
b
3 Normalization via Mini-Batch
BN :x y
γ,β 1...m 1...m
→
Statistics
astheBatchNormalizingTransform. WepresenttheBN
TransforminAlgorithm1.Inthealgorithm,ǫisaconstant
Since the full whitening of each layer’s inputs is costly
addedtothemini-batchvariancefornumericalstability.
and not everywhere differentiable, we make two neces-
sarysimplifications. Thefirstisthatinsteadofwhitening
the features in layer inputs and outputs jointly, we will Input: Valuesofxoveramini-batch: = x 1...m ;
B { }
normalizeeachscalarfeatureindependently,bymakingit Parameterstobelearned:γ,β
havethemeanofzeroandthevarianceof1. Fora layer Output: y i =BN γ,β (x i )
{ }
withd-dimensionalinputx=(x(1)...x(d)),wewillnor-
m
malizeeachdimension 1
µB x
i
//mini-batchmean
← m
x(k) E[x(k)] Xi=1
x(k) = − m
Var[x(k)] σ
B
2 1 (x
i
µB)2 //mini-batchvariance
wheretheexpecta
b
tionandv
p
ariancearecomputedoverthe
← m Xi=1 −
trainingdataset. Asshownin(LeCunetal.,1998b),such x
x
i −
µB
//normalize
i
normalizationspeedsupconvergence,evenwhenthefea- ← σ B 2 +ǫ
turesarenotdecorrelated. by γpx +β BN (x ) //scaleandshift
i i γ,β i
← ≡
Notethatsimplynormalizingeachinputofalayermay
change what the layer can represent. For instance, nor- Algorithm b 1: Batch Normalizing Transform, applied to
malizingtheinputsofasigmoidwouldconstrainthemto activationxoveramini-batch.
thelinearregimeofthenonlinearity. Toaddressthis, we
makesurethatthetransformationinsertedinthenetwork TheBNtransformcanbeaddedtoanetworktomanip-
canrepresenttheidentitytransform. Toaccomplishthis, ulate any activation. In the notation y = BN (x), we
γ,β
3

indicate that the parameters γ and β are to be learned, (Duchietal.,2011). Thenormalizationofactivationsthat
but it should be noted that the BN transform does not dependsonthemini-batchallowsefficienttraining,butis
independentlyprocessthe activation in each training ex- neithernecessarynordesirableduringinference;wewant
ample. Rather, BN (x) depends both on the training theoutputtodependonlyontheinput,deterministically.
γ,β
example and the other examples in the mini-batch. The For this, once the network has been trained, we use the
scaled and shifted values y are passed to other network normalization
layers. The normalized activations x are internal to our x E[x]
x= −
transformation, but their presence is crucial. The distri- Var[x]+ǫ
butions of values of any x has thebexpected value of 0 b p
using the population, rather than mini-batch, statistics.
and the variance of 1, as long as the elements of each
mini-batch are sampled frbom the same distribution, and Neglectingǫ,thesenormalizedactivationshavethesame
mean0andvariance1asduringtraining. Weusetheun-
if we neglect ǫ. This can be seen by observing that
m i=1 x i = 0 and m 1 m i=1 x2 i = 1, and taking expec- b th ia e s e e x d p v ec a t r a ia ti n o c n e is es o t v im er a t t r e ai V n a in r[ g x m ] = ini- m b m a − t 1 ch · e E s B of [σ s B i 2 z ] e , m wh a e n r d e
tPations. EachnormalizePdactivationx(k) canbeviewedas
an inpu b t to a sub-network co b mposed of the linear trans- σ B 2 aretheirsamplevariances.Usingmovingaveragesin-
stead, we can track the accuracy of a model as it trains.
formy(k) = γ(k)x(k) +β(k), followbedbytheotherpro-
Sincethemeansandvariancesarefixedduringinference,
cessingdonebytheoriginalnetwork. Thesesub-network
the normalizationis simply a linear transformappliedto
inputs all have fixbed means and variances, and although
eachactivation.Itmayfurtherbecomposedwiththescal-
thejointdistributionofthesenormalizedx(k) canchange
ingbyγ andshiftbyβ,toyieldasinglelineartransform
over the course of training, we expect that the introduc-
thatreplacesBN(x). Algorithm2summarizestheproce-
tion of normalized inputs accelerates thebtraining of the
durefortrainingbatch-normalizednetworks.
sub-networkand,consequently,thenetworkasawhole.
During training we need to backpropagate the gradi-
Input: NetworkNwithtrainableparametersΘ;
entoflossℓthroughthistransformation,aswellascom-
subsetofactivations x(k) K
pute the gradients with respect to the parameters of the { }k=1
BNtransform.Weusechainrule,asfollows(beforesim- Output: Batch-normalizednetworkforinference,Ni B n N f
plification): 1: Nt B r N ← N //TrainingBNnetwork
2: fork =1...K do
∂ ∂ x ℓ i = ∂ ∂ y ℓ i · γ 3: Add transformation y(k) = BN γ(k),β(k) (x(k)) to
∂ ∂ σ b ℓ B 2 = P m i=1 ∂ ∂ x b ℓ i · (x i − µB) · − 2 1(σ B 2 +ǫ)−3/2 4: N M t B o r N di ( f A y l e g a . c 1 h ) layerinNt B r N with inputx(k) to take
∂ℓ = m ∂ℓ −1 + ∂ℓ Pm i=1 −2(xi−µB) y(k) instead
∂µB (cid:18) P i=1 ∂x b i · √σB 2+ǫ(cid:19) ∂σB 2 · m 5: endfor
∂ ∂ ∂ ∂ x ℓ γ ℓ i = = ∂ ∂ x b ℓ i m i= · 1 √ ∂ ∂ σ y ℓ 1 i B 2+ · x ǫ i + ∂ ∂ σ ℓ B 2 · 2(xi m −µB) + ∂ ∂ µ ℓ B · m 1 7 6 : : N { T γ r i B a n ( N i k f n ), ← β N ( N k t B ) r t B N } r N K k= t 1 o //I o n p fe ti r m en iz c e eB t N he net p w a o ra r m kw et i e t r h s fro Θ zen ∪
∂ℓ = Pm ∂ℓ //parameters
∂β i=1 ∂yi b
P 8: fork =1...K do
Thus,BNtransformisadifferentiabletransformationthat 9: //Forclarity,x x(k),γ γ(k),µB µ( B k),etc.
introducesnormalizedactivationsintothenetwork. This ≡ ≡ ≡
10: Process multiple training mini-batches , each of
ensuresthatasthemodelistraining,layerscancontinue B
sizem,andaverageoverthem:
learningoninputdistributionsthatexhibitlessinternalco-
variateshift, thusacceleratingthetraining. Furthermore,
E[x]
←
EB[µB]
the learned affine transform applied to these normalized Var[x] ← m m −1 EB[σ B 2]
activationsallowstheBNtransformtorepresenttheiden-
titytransformationandpreservesthenetworkcapacity. 11: InNi B n N f,replacethetransformy = BN γ,β (x)with
y = γ x+ β γE[x]
√Var[x]+ǫ · − √Var[x]+ǫ
3.1 Training and Inference with Batch- (cid:0) (cid:1)
12: endfor
NormalizedNetworks
Algorithm2: TrainingaBatch-NormalizedNetwork
ToBatch-Normalizeanetwork,wespecifyasubsetofac-
tivations and insert the BN transform for each of them,
according to Alg. 1. Any layer that previously received 3.2 Batch-Normalized Convolutional Net-
xastheinput,nowreceivesBN(x). Amodelemploying
works
Batch Normalizationcanbe trainedusing batchgradient
descent,orStochasticGradientDescentwithamini-batch Batch Normalization can be applied to any set of acti-
size m > 1, or with anyof its variantssuch as Adagrad vations in the network. Here, we focus on transforms
4

that consist of an affine transformation followed by an thegradientduringbackpropagationandleadtothemodel
element-wisenonlinearity: explosion. However, with Batch Normalization, back-
propagationthrougha layeris unaffectedby the scale of
z=g(Wu+b) itsparameters.Indeed,forascalara,
whereW andbarelearnedparametersofthemodel,and BN(Wu)=BN((aW)u)
g()isthenonlinearitysuchassigmoidorReLU.Thisfor-
·
mulation covers both fully-connected and convolutional andwecanshowthat
layers. WeaddtheBNtransformimmediatelybeforethe
nonlinearity,bynormalizingx=Wu+b. Wecouldhave ∂BN((aW)u) = ∂BN(Wu)
∂u ∂u
also normalized the layer inputs u, but since u is likely ∂BN((aW)u) = 1 ∂BN(Wu)
theoutputofanothernonlinearity,theshapeofitsdistri- ∂(aW) a · ∂W
butionislikelytochangeduringtraining,andconstraining The scale does not affect the layer Jacobian nor, con-
itsfirstandsecondmomentswouldnoteliminatetheco- sequently, the gradient propagation. Moreover, larger
variateshift. Incontrast, Wu+bis morelikelyto have weightslead to smaller gradients, andBatch Normaliza-
asymmetric,non-sparsedistribution,thatis“moreGaus- tionwillstabilizetheparametergrowth.
sian”(Hyva¨rinen&Oja,2000);normalizingitislikelyto We further conjecture that Batch Normalization may
produceactivationswithastabledistribution. leadthelayerJacobianstohavesingularvaluescloseto1,
Notethat,sincewenormalizeWu+b,thebiasbcanbe which is known to be beneficial for training (Saxeetal.,
ignoredsinceitseffectwillbecanceledbythesubsequent 2013). Considertwoconsecutivelayerswithnormalized
meansubtraction(theroleofthebiasissubsumedbyβin inputs, andthe transformationbetweenthese normalized
Alg.1). Thus,z=g(Wu+b)isreplacedwith vectors:z=F(x). IfweassumethatxandzareGaussian
anduncorrelated,andthatF(x) Jxisalineartransfor-
z=g(BN(Wu)) mationfobrthegbivenmodelparam ≈ eterbs,thebnbothxandz
haveunitcovariances,andI b= Covb[z] = JCov[x]JT =
wheretheBNtransformisappliedindependentlytoeach
JJT. Thus, JJT = I, and so all singular valuebs of Jb
dimension of x = Wu, with a separate pair of learned
are equal to 1, which preserves the gbradient magbnitudes
parametersγ(k),β(k) perdimension.
duringbackpropagation. In reality, the transformationis
Forconvolutionallayers,weadditionallywantthenor-
notlinear,andthenormalizedvaluesarenotguaranteedto
malization to obey the convolutional property – so that
beGaussiannorindependent,butweneverthelessexpect
different elements of the same feature map, at different
Batch Normalization to help make gradient propagation
locations, are normalized in the same way. To achieve
better behaved. The precise effect of Batch Normaliza-
this, we jointly normalize all the activations in a mini-
tion on gradient propagation remains an area of further
batch,overalllocations. InAlg.1,welet bethesetof
B study.
all valuesin a feature mapacrossboth the elementsof a
mini-batchand spatial locations– so for a mini-batchof
size mandfeaturemapsofsize p q, we usetheeffec- 3.4 Batch Normalization regularizes the
tive mini-batchof size m′ = = × m pq. We learn a model
|B| ·
pair of parameters γ(k) and β(k) per feature map, rather
When training with Batch Normalization, a training ex-
than per activation. Alg. 2 is modified similarly, so that
ample is seen in conjunction with other examples in the
duringinferencetheBNtransformappliesthesamelinear
mini-batch, and the training network no longer produc-
transformationtoeachactivationinagivenfeaturemap.
ingdeterministicvaluesfora giventrainingexample. In
ourexperiments,wefoundthiseffecttobeadvantageous
3.3 Batch Normalization enables higher
to the generalization of the network. Whereas Dropout
learning rates
(Srivastavaetal., 2014) is typically used to reduce over-
fitting,inabatch-normalizednetworkwefoundthatitcan
In traditional deep networks, too-high learning rate may
beeitherremovedorreducedinstrength.
result in the gradients that explode or vanish, as well as
getting stuck in poor local minima. Batch Normaliza-
tion helps address these issues. By normalizing activa- 4 Experiments
tions throughout the network, it prevents small changes
totheparametersfromamplifyingintolargerandsubop-
4.1 Activationsovertime
timal changesin activations in gradients; for instance, it
prevents the training from getting stuck in the saturated To verify the effects of internal covariate shift on train-
regimesofnonlinearities. ing, andthe ability ofBatch Normalizationto combatit,
BatchNormalizationalsomakestrainingmoreresilient weconsideredtheproblemofpredictingthedigitclasson
totheparameterscale. Normally,largelearningratesmay theMNISTdataset(LeCunetal.,1998a). Weusedavery
increasethescaleoflayerparameters,whichthenamplify simplenetwork,witha28x28binaryimageasinput,and
5

1 2 2 detailsaregivenintheAppendix. Werefertothismodel
0.9 asInceptionintherestofthetext.Themodelwastrained
0 0
0.8 Without BN usinga versionofStochasticGradientDescentwithmo-
0.7 With BN −2 −2 mentum(Sutskeveretal.,2013),usingthemini-batchsize
10K 20K 30K 40K 50K
(a) (b)WithoutBN (c)WithBN of32.Thetrainingwasperformedusingalarge-scale,dis-
tributed architecture (similar to (Deanetal., 2012)). All
Figure 1: (a) The test accuracy of the MNIST network networksareevaluatedastrainingprogressesbycomput-
trained with and without Batch Normalization, vs. the ing the validation accuracy @1, i.e. the probability of
numberoftrainingsteps. BatchNormalizationhelpsthe predicting the correct label out of 1000 possibilities, on
network train faster and achieve higher accuracy. (b, aheld-outset,usingasinglecropperimage.
c) The evolution of input distributions to a typical sig- Inourexperiments,weevaluatedseveralmodifications
moid,overthecourseoftraining,shownas 15,50,85 th ofInceptionwithBatchNormalization.Inallcases,Batch
{ }
percentiles. Batch Normalization makes the distribution Normalizationwasappliedtotheinputofeachnonlinear-
morestableandreducestheinternalcovariateshift. ity, in a convolutional way, as described in section 3.2,
whilekeepingtherestofthearchitectureconstant.
3fully-connectedhiddenlayerswith100activationseach.
Eachhiddenlayercomputesy=g(Wu+b)withsigmoid
4.2.1 AcceleratingBNNetworks
nonlinearity,and the weights W initialized to small ran-
dom Gaussian values. The last hidden layer is followed
SimplyaddingBatchNormalizationtoanetworkdoesnot
by a fully-connected layer with 10 activations (one per
take full advantageof our method. To do so, we further
class)andcross-entropyloss. Wetrainedthenetworkfor
changed the network and its training parameters, as fol-
50000steps,with60examplespermini-batch. Weadded
lows:
BatchNormalizationtoeachhiddenlayerofthenetwork,
Increase learning rate. In a batch-normalized model,
asinSec.3.1. We wereinterestedinthecomparisonbe-
we have been able to achieve a training speedup from
tweenthebaselineandbatch-normalizednetworks,rather
higherlearningrates,withnoillsideeffects(Sec.3.3).
thanachievingthestateoftheartperformanceonMNIST
RemoveDropout. AsdescribedinSec.3.4,BatchNor-
(whichthedescribedarchitecturedoesnot).
malizationfulfillssomeofthesamegoalsasDropout.Re-
Figure 1(a) shows the fraction of correct predictions
movingDropoutfromModifiedBN-Inceptionspeedsup
by the two networks on held-out test data, as training
training,withoutincreasingoverfitting.
progresses. The batch-normalized network enjoys the
higher test accuracy. To investigate why, we studied in- Reducethe L 2 weight regularization. While in Incep-
putstothesigmoid,intheoriginalnetworkNandbatch- tionanL 2 lossonthemodelparameterscontrolsoverfit-
normalizednetworkNtr (Alg.2)overthecourseoftrain- ting, in ModifiedBN-Inceptionthe weightof this loss is
BN
ing.InFig.1(b,c)weshow,foronetypicalactivationfrom reducedby a factor of 5. We find that this improvesthe
the last hidden layer of each network, how its distribu- accuracyontheheld-outvalidationdata.
tion evolves. The distributions in the original network Accelerate the learning rate decay. In training Incep-
change significantly over time, both in their mean and tion, learning rate was decayed exponentially. Because
the variance, which complicates the training of the sub- our network trains faster than Inception, we lower the
sequentlayers. Incontrast,thedistributionsinthebatch- learningrate6timesfaster.
normalizednetworkaremuchmorestableastrainingpro- Remove Local Response Normalization While Incep-
gresses,whichaidsthetraining. tion and other networks (Srivastavaetal., 2014) benefit
fromit, wefoundthatwithBatchNormalizationitisnot
necessary.
4.2 ImageNetclassification
Shuffletrainingexamplesmorethoroughly.Weenabled
We applied Batch Normalization to a new variant of the within-shardshufflingofthetrainingdata,whichprevents
Inception network (Szegedyetal., 2014), trained on the thesameexamplesfromalwaysappearinginamini-batch
ImageNet classification task (Russakovskyetal., 2014). together. This led to about1%improvementsin the val-
The network has a large number of convolutional and idation accuracy, which is consistent with the view of
poolinglayers,withasoftmaxlayertopredicttheimage Batch Normalizationasa regularizer(Sec. 3.4): the ran-
class, outof1000possibilities. Convolutionallayersuse domizationinherentinourmethodshouldbemostbene-
ReLUasthenonlinearity.Themaindifferencetothenet- ficialwhenitaffectsanexampledifferentlyeachtimeitis
workdescribedin(Szegedyetal.,2014)isthatthe5 5 seen.
×
convolutionallayersarereplacedbytwoconsecutivelay- Reduce the photometric distortions. Because batch-
ersof3 3convolutionswithupto128filters. Thenet- normalizednetworkstrain faster and observeeach train-
×
work contains13.6 106 parameters, and, other than the ingexamplefewertimes,weletthetrainerfocusonmore
·
top softmax layer, has no fully-connected layers. More “real”imagesbydistortingthemless.
6

0.8
0.7
Model Stepsto72.2% Maxaccuracy
Inception 31.0 106 72.2%
0.6 BN-Baseline 13.3 · 106 72.7%
Inception BN-x5 2.1 · 106 73.0%
BN−Baseline ·
0.5 BN−x5 BN-x30 2.7 106 74.8%
BN−x30 ·
BN-x5-Sigmoid 69.8%
BN−x5−Sigmoid
Steps to match Inception
0.4
5M 10M 15M 20M 25M 30M Figure 3: For Inception and the batch-normalized
variants, the number of training steps required to
Figure 2: Single crop validation accuracy of Inception reachthemaximumaccuracyofInception(72.2%),
and its batch-normalized variants, vs. the number of and the maximum accuracy achieved by the net-
trainingsteps. work.
4.2.2 Single-NetworkClassification to be trained when sigmoid is used as the nonlinearity,
despite the well-known difficulty of training such net-
We evaluated the following networks, all trained on the
works. Indeed,BN-x5-Sigmoidachievestheaccuracyof
LSVRC2012 training data, and tested on the validation
69.8%.WithoutBatchNormalization,Inceptionwithsig-
data:
moidneverachievesbetterthan1/1000accuracy.
Inception: the network described at the beginning of
Section4.2,trainedwiththeinitiallearningrateof0.0015.
4.2.3 EnsembleClassification
BN-Baseline: Same as Inception with Batch Normal-
izationbeforeeachnonlinearity.
The currentreportedbest results on the ImageNetLarge
BN-x5: Inception with Batch Normalization and the
ScaleVisualRecognitionCompetitionarereachedbythe
modificationsin Sec. 4.2.1. Theinitiallearningrate was
Deep Image ensemble of traditional models (Wuetal.,
increasedbya factorof 5, to 0.0075. Thesamelearning
2015) and the ensemble modelof (Heetal., 2015). The
rateincreasewithoriginalInceptioncausedthemodelpa-
latterreportsthetop-5errorof4.94%,asevaluatedbythe
rameterstoreachmachineinfinity.
ILSVRCserver.Herewereportatop-5validationerrorof
BN-x30: LikeBN-x5,butwiththeinitiallearningrate 4.9%,andtesterrorof4.82%(accordingtotheILSVRC
0.045(30timesthatofInception). server). Thisimprovesuponthepreviousbestresult,and
BN-x5-Sigmoid: Like BN-x5, but with sigmoid non- exceedstheestimatedaccuracyofhumanratersaccording
linearityg(t) = 1+ex 1 p(−x) insteadofReLU.Wealsoat- to(Russakovskyetal.,2014).
tempted to train the originalInceptionwith sigmoid, but Forourensemble,weused6networks.Eachwasbased
themodelremainedattheaccuracyequivalenttochance. onBN-x30,modifiedviasomeofthefollowing:increased
In Figure 2, we show the validation accuracy of the initialweightsintheconvolutionallayers;usingDropout
networks, as a function of the number of training steps. (with the Dropout probability of 5% or 10%, vs. 40%
Inception reached the accuracy of 72.2% after 31 106 for the originalInception); and using non-convolutional,
·
training steps. The Figure 3 shows, for each network, per-activationBatch Normalization with last hidden lay-
the number of training steps required to reach the same ers of the model. Each network achieved its maximum
72.2%accuracy,aswellasthemaximumvalidationaccu- accuracyafterabout6 106 trainingsteps. Theensemble
·
racy reached by the network and the number of steps to prediction was based on the arithmetic average of class
reachit. probabilitiespredicted by the constituent networks. The
ByonlyusingBatchNormalization(BN-Baseline),we detailsofensembleandmulticropinferencearesimilarto
matchtheaccuracyofInceptioninlessthanhalfthenum- (Szegedyetal.,2014).
ber of training steps. By applying the modifications in We demonstrate in Fig. 4 that batch normalizational-
Sec.4.2.1,wesignificantlyincreasethetrainingspeedof lowsustosetnewstate-of-the-artbyahealthymarginon
the network. BN-x5needs14 timesfewer stepsthan In- theImageNetclassificationchallengebenchmarks.
ception to reach the 72.2% accuracy. Interestingly, in-
creasing the learning rate further (BN-x30) causes the
modelto trainsomewhatslower initially,butallowsitto 5 Conclusion
reachahigherfinalaccuracy.Itreaches74.8%after6 106
·
steps, i.e. 5timesfewerstepsthanrequiredbyInception We have presented a novel mechanism for dramatically
toreach72.2%. acceleratingthetrainingofdeepnetworks. Itisbasedon
We also verified that the reduction in internal covari- the premisethat covariateshift, whichis knownto com-
ateshiftallowsdeepnetworkswithBatchNormalization plicatethetrainingofmachinelearningsystems,alsoap-
7

Model Resolution Crops Models Top-1error Top-5error
GoogLeNetensemble 224 144 7 - 6.67%
DeepImagelow-res 256 - 1 - 7.96%
DeepImagehigh-res 512 - 1 24.88 7.42%
DeepImageensemble variable - - - 5.98%
BN-Inceptionsinglecrop 224 1 1 25.2% 7.82%
BN-Inceptionmulticrop 224 144 1 21.99% 5.82%
BN-Inceptionensemble 224 144 6 20.1% 4.9%*
Figure4: Batch-NormalizedInceptioncomparisonwithpreviousstateoftheartontheprovidedvalidationsetcom-
prising50000images. *BN-Inceptionensemblehasreached4.82%top-5erroronthe100000imagesofthetestsetof
theImageNetasreportedbythetestserver.
plies to sub-networks and layers, and removing it from entiating characteristics of Batch Normalization include
internal activations of the network may aid in training. the learned scale and shift that allow the BN transform
Our proposedmethoddrawsits power fromnormalizing torepresentidentity(thestandardizationlayerdidnotre-
activations, and fromincorporatingthis normalizationin quirethissinceitwasfollowedbythelearnedlineartrans-
thenetworkarchitectureitself. Thisensuresthatthenor- form that, conceptually, absorbs the necessary scale and
malization is appropriately handled by any optimization shift), handlingofconvolutionallayers, deterministicin-
method that is being used to train the network. To en- ferencethatdoesnotdependonthemini-batch,andbatch-
able stochastic optimization methods commonly used in normalizingeachconvolutionallayerinthenetwork.
deepnetworktraining, we performthenormalizationfor In this work, we have not explored the full range of
eachmini-batch,andbackpropagatethegradientsthrough possibilitiesthatBatchNormalizationpotentiallyenables.
thenormalizationparameters. BatchNormalizationadds Our future work includes applications of our method to
onlytwoextraparametersperactivation,andindoingso RecurrentNeuralNetworks(Pascanuetal.,2013),where
preserves the representation ability of the network. We theinternalcovariateshiftandthevanishingorexploding
presentedanalgorithmforconstructing,training,andper- gradientsmay beespecially severe, andwhichwouldal-
forminginference with batch-normalizednetworks. The lowustomorethoroughlytestthehypothesisthatnormal-
resultingnetworkscanbe trainedwith saturatingnonlin- izationimprovesgradientpropagation(Sec.3.3).Weplan
earities,aremoretoleranttoincreasedtrainingrates,and toinvestigatewhetherBatchNormalizationcanhelpwith
oftendonotrequireDropoutforregularization. domainadaptation,in its traditionalsense – i.e. whether
the normalization performed by the network would al-
Merely adding Batch Normalization to a state-of-the-
low it to more easily generalize to new data distribu-
artimageclassificationmodelyieldsasubstantialspeedup
tions,perhapswithjustarecomputationofthepopulation
in training. By further increasing the learning rates, re-
meansandvariances(Alg.2).Finally,webelievethatfur-
moving Dropout, and applying other modifications af-
thertheoreticalanalysisofthealgorithmwouldallowstill
forded by Batch Normalization, we reach the previous
moreimprovementsandapplications.
stateoftheartwithonlyasmallfractionoftrainingsteps
–andthenbeatthestateoftheartinsingle-networkimage
classification. Furthermore,bycombiningmultiplemod-
References
els trained with Batch Normalization, we performbetter
thanthebestknownsystemonImageNet,byasignificant
Bengio, Yoshua and Glorot, Xavier. Understanding the
margin.
difficultyoftrainingdeepfeedforwardneuralnetworks.
Interestingly, our method bears similarity to the stan- In Proceedingsof AISTATS 2010, volume 9, pp. 249–
dardization layer of (Gu¨lc¸ehre&Bengio, 2013), though 256,May2010.
thetwomethodsstemfromverydifferentgoals,andper-
form different tasks. The goal of Batch Normalization Dean,Jeffrey,Corrado,GregS.,Monga,Rajat,Chen,Kai,
is to achieve a stable distribution of activation values Devin,Matthieu,Le,QuocV.,Mao,MarkZ.,Ranzato,
throughout training, and in our experiments we apply it Marc’Aurelio,Senior,Andrew,Tucker,Paul,Yang,Ke,
before the nonlinearity since that is where matching the and Ng, Andrew Y. Large scale distributed deep net-
first and second moments is more likely to result in a works. InNIPS,2012.
stabledistribution. Onthecontrary,(Gu¨lc¸ehre&Bengio,
2013)applythestandardizationlayertotheoutputofthe Desjardins,GuillaumeandKavukcuoglu,Koray. Natural
nonlinearity, which results in sparser activations. In our neuralnetworks. (unpublished).
large-scaleimageclassificationexperiments,wehavenot
observedthenonlinearityinputstobesparse,neitherwith Duchi, John, Hazan, Elad, and Singer, Yoram. Adaptive
nor without Batch Normalization. Other notable differ- subgradientmethodsforonlinelearningandstochastic
8

optimization.J.Mach.Learn.Res.,12:2121–2159,July Saxe, Andrew M., McClelland, James L., and Ganguli,
2011. ISSN1532-4435. Surya. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics
of learning in deep linear neural networks. CoRR,
Gu¨lc¸ehre, C¸aglar and Bengio, Yoshua. Knowledgemat- abs/1312.6120,2013.
ters: Importanceofpriorinformationforoptimization.
CoRR,abs/1301.4083,2013. Shimodaira, Hidetoshi. Improving predictive inference
under covariate shift by weighting the log-likelihood
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Delving Deep function.JournalofStatisticalPlanningandInference,
intoRectifiers: SurpassingHuman-LevelPerformance 90(2):227–244,October2000.
on ImageNet Classification. ArXiv e-prints, February
2015. Srivastava, Nitish, Hinton, Geoffrey, Krizhevsky, Alex,
Sutskever, Ilya, and Salakhutdinov, Ruslan. Dropout:
Hyva¨rinen,A.andOja,E. Independentcomponentanal- Asimplewaytopreventneuralnetworksfromoverfit-
ysis: Algorithms and applications. Neural Netw., 13 ting. J. Mach.Learn. Res., 15(1):1929–1958,January
(4-5):411–430,May2000. 2014.
Jiang, Jing. A literaturesurveyon domainadaptationof Sutskever, Ilya, Martens, James, Dahl, George E., and
statisticalclassifiers,2008. Hinton, Geoffrey E. On the importance of initial-
ization and momentum in deep learning. In ICML
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haffner, P. (3),volume28ofJMLRProceedings,pp.1139–1147.
Gradient-based learning applied to document recog- JMLR.org,2013.
nition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324,
Szegedy, Christian, Liu, Wei, Jia, Yangqing, Sermanet,
November1998a.
Pierre, Reed, Scott, Anguelov, Dragomir, Erhan, Du-
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Orr, G., and Muller, K. Efficient mitru, Vanhoucke, Vincent, and Rabinovich, An-
backprop.InOrr,G.andK.,Muller(eds.),NeuralNet- drew. Going deeper with convolutions. CoRR,
works: Tricksofthetrade.Springer,1998b. abs/1409.4842,2014.
Wiesler,SimonandNey,Hermann. Aconvergenceanal-
Lyu,SandSimoncelli,EP. Nonlinearimagerepresenta-
ysisoflog-lineartraining. InShawe-Taylor,J.,Zemel,
tion using divisive normalization. In Proc. Computer
R.S.,Bartlett,P.,Pereira,F.C.N.,andWeinberger,K.Q.
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8. IEEE Com-
(eds.),AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSys-
puter Society, Jun 23-28 2008. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
tems24,pp.657–665,Granada,Spain,December2011.
2008.4587821.
Wiesler, Simon, Richard, Alexander, Schlu¨ter, Ralf, and
Nair,VinodandHinton,GeoffreyE.Rectifiedlinearunits
Ney, Hermann. Mean-normalized stochastic gradient
improverestrictedboltzmannmachines. InICML, pp.
for large-scale deep learning. In IEEE International
807–814.Omnipress,2010.
ConferenceonAcoustics,Speech,andSignalProcess-
ing,pp.180–184,Florence,Italy,May2014.
Pascanu, Razvan, Mikolov, Tomas, and Bengio, Yoshua.
Onthedifficultyoftrainingrecurrentneuralnetworks.
Wu, Ren, Yan, Shengen, Shan, Yi, Dang, Qingqing, and
InProceedingsofthe30thInternationalConferenceon
Sun,Gang.Deepimage:Scalingupimagerecognition,
MachineLearning,ICML2013,Atlanta,GA,USA,16-
2015.
21June2013,pp.1310–1318,2013.
Povey, Daniel, Zhang, Xiaohui, and Khudanpur, San-
jeev. Parallel training of deep neural networks with Appendix
natural gradient and parameter averaging. CoRR,
abs/1410.7455,2014.
Variantofthe Inception Model Used
Raiko, Tapani, Valpola, Harri, and LeCun, Yann. Deep Figure 5 documents the changes that were performed
learning made easier by linear transformationsin per- compared to the architecture with respect to the
ceptrons. InInternationalConferenceonArtificialIn- GoogleNet archictecture. For the interpretation of this
telligenceandStatistics(AISTATS),pp.924–932,2012. table, please consult(Szegedyetal., 2014). The notable
architecturechangescomparedto the GoogLeNetmodel
Russakovsky,Olga,Deng,Jia,Su,Hao,Krause,Jonathan,
include:
Satheesh,Sanjeev,Ma,Sean, Huang,Zhiheng,Karpa-
thy,Andrej,Khosla,Aditya,Bernstein,Michael,Berg, The 5 5 convolutional layers are replaced by two
• ×
AlexanderC., and Fei-Fei, Li. ImageNetLarge Scale consecutive 3 3 convolutional layers. This in-
×
VisualRecognitionChallenge,2014. creases the maximum depth of the network by 9
9

weight layers. Also it increases the number of pa-
rameters by 25% and the computational cost is in-
creasedbyabout30%.
The number 28 28 inception modules is increased
• ×
from2to3.
Inside the modules, sometimes average, sometimes
•
maximum-poolingisemployed. Thisisindicatedin
theentriescorrespondingtothepoolinglayersofthe
table.
There are no across the board pooling layers be-
•
tween anytwo Inceptionmodules, butstride-2con-
volution/poolinglayersare employedbeforethe fil-
terconcatenationinthemodules3c,4e.
Our model employed separable convolution with depth
multiplier8onthefirstconvolutionallayer. Thisreduces
thecomputationalcostwhileincreasingthememorycon-
sumptionattrainingtime.
10

type patchsize/ output depth #1×1 #3×3 #3×3 double#3×3 double Pool+proj
stride size reduce reduce #3×3
convolution* 7×7/2 112×112×64 1
maxpool 3×3/2 56×56×64 0
convolution 3×3/1 56×56×192 1 64 192
maxpool 3×3/2 28×28×192 0
inception(3a) 28×28×256 3 64 64 64 64 96 avg+32
inception(3b) 28×28×320 3 64 64 96 64 96 avg+64
inception(3c) stride2 28×28×576 3 0 128 160 64 96 max+passthrough
inception(4a) 14×14×576 3 224 64 96 96 128 avg+128
inception(4b) 14×14×576 3 192 96 128 96 128 avg+128
inception(4c) 14×14×576 3 160 128 160 128 160 avg+128
inception(4d) 14×14×576 3 96 128 192 160 192 avg+128
inception(4e) stride2 14×14×1024 3 0 128 192 192 256 max+passthrough
inception(5a) 7×7×1024 3 352 192 320 160 224 avg+128
inception(5b) 7×7×1024 3 352 192 320 192 224 max+128
avgpool 7×7/1 1×1×1024 0
Figure5:Inceptionarchitecture
11